[FLINK-25024][docs] Add Changelog backend docs (#18431)
apache/flink: docs/content/docs/ops/state/state_backends.md

{{< top >}}

## Enabling Changelog

> // todo: Chinese version of all changed docs

Author: Yes, that's what I was going to do, I just wanted to get the approval first for the English version (otherwise translation would be inconsistent).

> // todo: Chinese version of all changed docs

Author: FLINK-25867

// todo: mention in [large state tuning]({{< ref "docs/ops/state/large_state_tuning" >}})? or 1.16?

{{< hint warning >}} The feature is in experimental status. {{< /hint >}}

{{< hint warning >}} Enabling Changelog may have a negative performance impact on your application (see below). {{< /hint >}}

### Introduction

Changelog is a feature that aims to decrease checkpointing time, and therefore end-to-end latency in exactly-once mode.

Most commonly, checkpoint duration is affected by:

1. Barrier travel time and alignment, addressed by
   [Unaligned checkpoints]({{< ref "docs/ops/state/checkpointing_under_backpressure#unaligned-checkpoints" >}})
   and [Buffer debloating]({{< ref "docs/ops/state/checkpointing_under_backpressure#buffer-debloating" >}})

> 2. Snapshot creation time (so-called synchronous phase), addressed by Asynchronous snapshots

Author: I agree, it's confusing.

What I mean here is minimizing the synchronous phase duration by using some form of persistent data structures (CoW for Heap and immutable SSTables in RocksDB). 
This is [called](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-release-1.14/docs/ops/state/state_backends/#the-embeddedrocksdbstatebackend) asynchronous checkpoints/snapshots.

WDYT about
```
2. Snapshot creation time (so-called synchronous phase), reduced by immutable (or asynchronous) snapshots. 
```
Or maybe just remove the clarification?

> 2. Snapshot creation time (so-called synchronous phase), addressed by Asynchronous snapshots

Reviewer: That's what I am not sure about.

Snapshot creation time: (isn't that just preparing for changelogs to be uploaded)? 
And previously snapshot creat time: flush + prepare SSTs to be uploaded?

I think most of the time reduced is from the async phase (uploading before ahead, so the async phase does not take very long time).

> 2. Snapshot creation time (so-called synchronous phase), addressed by Asynchronous snapshots

Author: > Snapshot creation time: (isn't that just preparing for changelogs to be uploaded)?
> And previously snapshot creat time: flush + prepare SSTs to be uploaded?

Yes.

> Would these two parts significantly different?
> I think most of the time reduced is from the async phase

For changelog, it's usually under 100ms, without it can take tens of seconds (above p99%). That can sound not much, but this phase blocks the entire processing. I describe it [here](https://github.com/apache/flink/pull/18431#discussion_r790436952).

But actually this statement is about reduction by using Async checkpoints which were implemented long time ago, not related to the Changelog.

3. Snapshot upload time (asynchronous phase)

The latter (upload time) can be decreased by [Incremental checkpoints]({{< ref "#incremental-checkpoints" >}}). However,
even with Incremental checkpoints, large deployments tend to have at least one task in every checkpoint that uploads a

> lot of data (e.g. after compaction).

Reviewer: 1. Add some context here:
Current Incremental Checkpoints depend on the implementation of different types of state backends. For example, for rocksdb, compaction happens when ... 

2. Explain a bit why compaction is bad
Compaction may cause more data to be uploaded, and more time to upload....

Author: 1. I think explaining when the compaction can be triggered is outside of scope of this section. There are several compaction algorithms, to start with.
2. Agree

Reviewer: I am not asking to explain the entire different compaction algorithms, but since you mentioned "at least one task in every checkpoint that uploads a lot of data (e.g. after compaction)." You need to explain why.

That's what I mean by providing some context: what causes to upload a lot data; that's compaction, then why compaction causes more data to upload... e.t.c

I do not think people can infer directly why compaction can cause more data to upload until you explain at least a little bit of different level of compaction e.t.c.

Author: I've expanded this section to address (2), do you still have any concerns about (1)?

With Changelog enabled, Flink uploads state changes continuously, forming a changelog. On checkpoint, only the relevant

> part of this changelog needs to be uploaded. Independently, configured state backend is checkpointed in the

Reviewer: "is checkpointed" => "is snapshotted"

It may confuse people with the normal Flink checkpointing procedure.

background periodically. Upon successful upload, changelog is truncated.

> As a result, asynchronous phase is reduced, as well as synchronous phase (in particular, long-tail).

Reviewer: "as well as synchronous phase (in particular, long-tail)"

Could you explain a bit more. Can not infer directly from what stated above.

Author: Explained, PTAL.

On the flip side, resource usage is higher:

- more files are created on DFS

> - more IO bandwidth is used to upload

Reviewer: upload state change/changelogs

- more CPU used to serialize state changes
- more memory used by Task Managers to buffer state changes

> - todo: more details after testing, maybe link to blogpost

Reviewer: mark here to remove todo in the final version.

Recovery time is another thing to consider. Depending on the `state.backend.changelog.periodic-materialize.interval`,
changelog can become lengthy and replaying it may take more time. However, recovery time combined with checkpoint
duration will likely be still lower than in non-changelog setup, providing lower end-to-end latency even in failover

> case.

Reviewer: `However, recovery time combined with checkpoint
duration will likely be still lower than in non-changelog setup, providing lower end-to-end latency even in failover
case.`

I am not sure of that.

Author: Could you elaborate a bit?

In the experiments, we saw a reduction of checkpoint duration by minutes, and increase of recovery times by tens of seconds. This is not guaranteed of course, but I think it is likely.

Reviewer: Recovery time really depends on how much data to restore.

I also saw a lot of cases that recovery time increased by tens of seconds but checkpoint duration does not decrease that much.

What we showed in the graph is a job instance with 196GB state size, and there are a lot of cases that the above statement does not hold.

I do not think we should mix recovery time with checkpoint duration here.

Author: > I also saw a lot of cases that recovery time increased by tens of seconds but checkpoint duration does not decrease that much.

If checkpoint duration doesn't decrease significantly then it's probably not a suitable case to use Changelog. So the question I think is what's the ratio between these times and how to put it in the docs.

> I do not think we should mix recovery time with checkpoint duration here.

Reducing **effective** recovery time is actually one of the goals of the project (please see FLIP [Motivation](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-158%3A+Generalized+incremental+checkpoints#FLIP158:Generalizedincrementalcheckpoints-Motivation) and discussions); and the mean to achieve this is by having less data to replay for the whole pipeline (while having data to replay by Changelog on Task level).

Reviewer: What I want to say is there is no evidence showing that recovery time is guaranteed to be reduced. 
1. "less data replay" has an assumption that checkpoint duration is reduced (there is not always a significant reduction as I mentioned above).
2. Replaying of changelog to DB is an additional cost for recovery with changelog vs. normal recovery. 

1+2 made me not be convinced with 
"However, recovery time combined with checkpoint duration will likely be still lower than in non-changelog setup, providing lower end-to-end latency even in failover case."

Author: There is **no guarantee**, but there **is evidence** for some cases. 
And this is also true for the checkpoint duration (there is even guarantee that it will increase in some cases, e.g. many updates of a single key).

That's why I put it as "likely". Do you prefer some other wording?

Or I could add something like "However, it's also possible that the effective recovery time will increase, depending on the actual ratio of the aformentioned times", WDYT?

Author: I've added the latter statement in 2512d75, PTAL.

{{< tab "Scala" >}}
```scala
val env = StreamExecutionEnvironment.getExecutionEnvironment()
env.enableChangelogStateBackend(true)
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< tab "Python" >}}
```python
env = StreamExecutionEnvironment.get_execution_environment()
env.enable_changelog_statebackend(true)
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Monitoring

Available metrics are listed [here]({{< ref "docs/ops/metrics#changelog" >}}).

In the UI, if a task is back-pressured by writing state changes, it will be shown as busy (red).

### Upgrading existing jobs

**Enabling Changelog**

Resuming from both savepoints and checkpoints is supported:
- given an existing non-changelog job
- take either a [savepoint]({{< ref "docs/ops/state/savepoints#resuming-from-savepoints" >}}) or a [checkpoint]({{< ref "docs/ops/state/checkpoints#resuming-from-a-retained-checkpoint" >}})
- alter configuration (enable Changelog)
- resume from the taken snapshot

**Disabling Changelog**
Resuming only from [savepoints]({{< ref "docs/ops/state/savepoints#resuming-from-savepoints" >}})
is supported. Resuming from [checkpoints]({{<  ref "docs/ops/state/checkpoints#resuming-from-a-retained-checkpoint" >}})
is planned in the future versions.

> **State migration** (including changing TTL) is currently not supported

Reviewer: Include these in the limitation section?

{{< top >}}

## Enabling Changelog

// todo: Chinese version of all changed docs

// todo: mention in [large state tuning]({{< ref "docs/ops/state/large_state_tuning" >}})? or 1.16?

{{< hint warning >}} The feature is in experimental status. {{< /hint >}}

{{< hint warning >}} Enabling Changelog may have a negative performance impact on your application (see below). {{< /hint >}}

### Introduction

Changelog is a feature that aims to decrease checkpointing time, and therefore end-to-end latency in exactly-once mode.

Most commonly, checkpoint duration is affected by:

1. Barrier travel time and alignment, addressed by
   [Unaligned checkpoints]({{< ref "docs/ops/state/checkpointing_under_backpressure#unaligned-checkpoints" >}})
   and [Buffer debloating]({{< ref "docs/ops/state/checkpointing_under_backpressure#buffer-debloating" >}})

> 2. Snapshot creation time (so-called synchronous phase), addressed by Asynchronous snapshots

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Snapshot creation time (so-called synchronous phase), addressed by asynchronous snapshots
```

> 2. Snapshot creation time (so-called synchronous phase), addressed by asynchronous snapshots

Reviewer: `asynchronous snapshots`

What are asynchronous snapshots? and how it is different from `asynchronous phase`

Do you mean the materialization is separated and independent with the checkpointing/snapshotting?

Author: > What are asynchronous snapshots? and how it is different from asynchronous phase

synchronous phase = create a snapshot
asynchronous phase = upload a snapshot

Implemented naively, sync phase would duplicate **all** the state (copying all in-memory tables and/or on-disk files). So that async phase and processing can proceed concurrently.

With Asynchronous snapshots (probably a misnormer), sync phase only flushes or modifies small portions of data, as I explained [above](https://github.com/apache/flink/pull/18431#discussion_r790783796).

> Do you mean the materialization is separated and independent with the checkpointing/snapshotting?

No. As I said [above](https://github.com/apache/flink/pull/18431#discussion_r791455950), asynchronous snapshots are not related to Changelog.

Reviewer: **Without Changelog:**
Sync phase: flush in-mem data -> disk, prepare what-ssts to upload

**With Changelog:**
Sync phase: prepare state-changes to upload

From the differences above, I can not infer what async snapshots refer to and can not see what problem the "async snapshots are addressed"? Or if I misunderstand the above process?

Reviewer: OK, I finally got what you said.

Is there any reference you can use here? similar to Unaligned checkpoints and Buffer debloating?

It would be too confusing otherwise.

Author: Sure, I'll linkt to [RocksDB](https://nightlies.apache.org/flink/flink-docs-master/docs/ops/state/state_backends/#the-embeddedrocksdbstatebackend) section where they are mentioned.

3. Snapshot upload time (asynchronous phase)

> The last one (upload time) can be decreased by [Incremental checkpoints]({{< ref "#incremental-checkpoints" >}}).
> However, most Incremental State Backends perform some form of compaction periodically, which results in re-uploading the
> old state in addition to the new changes. In large deployments, the probability of at least one task uploading lots of
> data tend to be very high in every checkpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Upload time can be decreased by [incremental checkpoints]({{< ref "#incremental-checkpoints" >}}).
However, most incremental state backends perform some form of compaction periodically, which results in re-uploading the
old state in addition to the new changes. In large deployments, the probability of at least one task uploading lots of
data tends to be very high in every checkpoint.
```

> With Changelog enabled, Flink uploads state changes continuously, forming a changelog. On checkpoint, only the relevant
> part of this changelog needs to be uploaded. Independently, configured state backend is snapshotted in the
> background periodically. Upon successful upload, changelog is truncated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With Changelog enabled, Flink uploads state changes continuously and forms a changelog. On checkpoint, only the relevant
part of this changelog needs to be uploaded. The configured state backend is snapshotted in the
background periodically. Upon successful upload, the changelog is truncated.
```

As a result, asynchronous phase duration is reduced, as well as synchronous phase - because no data needs to be flushed
to disk. In particular, long-tail latency is improved.

> On the flip side, resource usage is higher:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, resource usage is higher:
```

- more files are created on DFS
- more IO bandwidth is used to upload state changes
- more CPU used to serialize state changes
- more memory used by Task Managers to buffer state changes
- todo: more details after testing, maybe link to blogpost

> Recovery time is another thing to consider. Depending on the `state.backend.changelog.periodic-materialize.interval`,
> changelog can become lengthy and replaying it may take more time. However, recovery time combined with checkpoint
> duration will likely be still lower than in non-changelog setup, providing lower end-to-end latency even in failover
> case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Recovery time is another thing to consider. Depending on the `state.backend.changelog.periodic-materialize.interval` setting,
the changelog can become lengthy and replaying it may take more time. However, recovery time combined with checkpoint
duration will likely still be lower than in non-changelog setups, providing lower end-to-end latency even in failover
case.
```

For more details, see [FLIP-158](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/FLINK/FLIP-158%3A+Generalized+incremental+checkpoints).

### Installation

> Changelog jars are included into the standard Flink distribution.
> 
> Please make sure to [add]({{< ref "docs/deployment/filesystems/overview" >}}) the necessary filesystem plugins.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Changelog JARs are included into the standard Flink distribution.

Make sure to [add]({{< ref "docs/deployment/filesystems/overview" >}}) the necessary filesystem plugins.
```

### Configuration

> An example configuration in yaml:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is an example configuration in YAML:
```

```yaml
state.backend.changelog.enabled: true
state.backend.changelog.storage: filesystem # currently, only filesystem and memory (for tests) are supported
dstl.dfs.base-path: s3://<bucket-name> # similar to state.checkpoints.dir
```

Please keep the following defaults (see [limitations](#limitations)):
```yaml
execution.checkpointing.max-concurrent-checkpoints: 1
state.backend.local-recovery: false
```

> Please refer to [configuration reference]({{< ref "docs/deployment/config#state-changelog-options" >}}) for other options.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please refer to the [configuration section]({{< ref "docs/deployment/config#state-changelog-options" >}}) for other options.
```

> Changelog can also be enabled or disabled per-job programmatically:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Changelog can also be enabled or disabled per job programmatically:
```

{{< tabs  >}}
{{< tab "Java" >}}
```java
StreamExecutionEnvironment env = StreamExecutionEnvironment.getExecutionEnvironment();
env.enableChangelogStateBackend(true);
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< tab "Scala" >}}
```scala
val env = StreamExecutionEnvironment.getExecutionEnvironment()
env.enableChangelogStateBackend(true)
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< tab "Python" >}}
```python
env = StreamExecutionEnvironment.get_execution_environment()
env.enable_changelog_statebackend(true)
```
{{< /tab >}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Monitoring

Available metrics are listed [here]({{< ref "docs/ops/metrics#changelog" >}}).

> In the UI, if a task is back-pressured by writing state changes, it will be shown as busy (red).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a task is backpressured by writing state changes, it will be shown as busy (red) in the UI.
```
